---
layout: post
title: "<i>Bowerman and the Men of Oregon: The Story of Oregon's Legendary Coach and Nike's Co-founder</i>"
author: Kenny Moore
year: 2006
blurb: Bill Bowerman was known first and foremost as Oregon’s iconic track coach and only second as the founder of Nike, a fact which all but guarantees an interesting biography. 
tags:
  - nonfiction
  - biography
redirect_from: /posts/2020-12-05-bowerman-and-the-men-of-oregon
---

As the title of the book states, Bill Bowerman was known first and foremost as Oregon’s iconic track coach and only second as the founder of Nike, a fact which all but guarantees an interesting biography. While author Moore had excellent source material, great credit goes to him for producing a beautifully-written book that is engaging whether it is bringing to life dozens of races or recounting the tribulations of Bowerman’s ancestors on the Oregon trail. Moore’s account also benefits from his own intimate relationship to the subject: a Bowerman-trained athlete while at Oregon and for years after, Moore just missed an Olympic medal in the Marathon.

400+ pages later, and through no fault of Moore’s, the psychology of Bowerman still confounds. Elite coaches typically fall on a spectrum, with the Bobby Knights on one end and the John Woodens on the other, and Bowerman exhibited tendencies of both. At his core, he cared deeply about his athletes and took a tailored, time consuming approach for each person he coached. Contrary to what was popular at the time, he did not believe athletes should push through pain no matter what, and he absolutely would not let someone compete if he wasn’t healthy. Bowerman was one of the early pioneers of “hard days/easy days” and vehemently defended the novel concept of recovery time. Endearingly, he rewarded his athletes as much for their effort as for their talent, and he had no interest in motivating the lazy, no matter how talented. He once remarked, “I have neither the time nor patience to waste on trash.” This hard line approach could justifiably draw criticism in cases where he wrongly labeled an athlete or colleague as trash, as once you were in Bill’s black book, there was no going back. Alas, Bowerman was a coach you ran for because you loved him, respected him, and feared him all at the same time. 

Bowerman’s range in pursuits both athletic and academic was extremely impressive. While most well known for his distance coaching, he minted a gold medalist in the 400m in Otis Davis and was a trusted shot and javelin coach, a feat practically unheard of then or now. There wasn’t even a full-time throws coach at Oregon until Bowerman retired. His role at Nike was that of the great inventor, and it really is amazing how handy and creative he was. Before Knight ever conceived the idea of Blue Ribbon Sports, Bowerman was stitching together racing shoes for one-time use by his athletes, after which they’d begin to fall apart. The book does, however, accurately represent Knight as the driving force behind Nike, as Bowerman’s love of sport far exceeded his love of business, a sticky fact that made Bowerman difficult to manage as the company grew from an upstart of misfits evangelizing the joy of running into a major corporation with a bottom line. 

Moore’s book is a fun and at times emotional romp through history, both track and non-track related. For track-loving readers, you get the joy of reading about milers going under 4:00 minutes for the first time, the invention of the Fosbury Flop, Prefontaine's brief but powerful imprint on the world, the rise of doping, and the ridiculously extreme stance on amateurism in track, which forbid not only college athletes but also professionals from competing in the Olympics if they were profiting in any way from the sport. Over several frustrating decades, Bowerman helped lobby to abolish this purity test and provide pro athletes with a life other than penury. 

You also get to experience some of the most important events of the 20th century through the lens of track and field, including WWII; Vietnam’s draft and the campus protests’ effects on competition; MLK assassination, race riots, and the subsequent question of boycotting the Olympics in ‘68; and the tragic ‘72 games, of which Bowerman had the dubious honor of being head coach, where he had to not only emotionally stabilize his athletes for competition hours after a terrorist attack but also deal with the incompetent and sociopathic head of the IOC, Avery Brundage. 

On a lighter note, it’s amazing what coaches could get away with just a few decades ago. Bowerman was a notorious prankster, and his two signature pranks were urinating on his athletes in the shower when were they caught unawares, and branding athletes with his keys while in the sauna as a rite of passage. 

While the book’s title makes it clear that this is a book about Bowerman and the MEN of Oregon, I would have liked just some context on why Bowerman completely ignored the women’s program at Oregon. While at Oregon, Bowerman never coached a female athlete, and the book doesn’t mention why. Oregon did not have a designated women’s coach until Bowerman’s retirement in 1974, after which the program quickly became a powerhouse there too. Perhaps he was just more comfortable with coaching men and had inherited the attitude of the times that women could not be serious athletes. This was dispelled later in his life when Mary Decker rose to global prominence, and Bowerman did help coach her on the side. Moore makes it clear Bowerman respected women and reserved a special sense of awe for his mother, who was forced to raise the children alone after her husband cheated on and then divorced her while she was pregnant with twins. Moore performs some armchair psychology that Bowerman from a young age was distrustful of men and shunned overt displays of masculinity, which manifested later in life when Bowerman forbid his athletes from calling him “coach.”

All in all, a very special and neglected sports biography by a talented Sports Illustrated writer that even casual fans of running will enjoy.
