---
layout: post
title: "<i>The Kill Chain: How Emerging Technologies Threaten America's Military Dominance</i> (2020)"
author: Christian Brose
date: 2020-04-24
tags: nonfiction
---

_The Kill Chain_ is a convincing wake-up call that the military-congressional-industrial complex is so broken that the very survival of America as Americans know it is at risk unless mammoth changes are made in how the Department of Defense defines, identifies, procures and deploys emerging technology, a problem that is as much about organizational change as it is about technological change. 

America’s complacent mindset stems from its decades-long military dominance and lack of serious retribution for its “business as usual” approach to warfare: the U.S. fights offensively, projecting its combat power directly onto enemy territory via large, manned platforms (tanks, fighter jets, etc) and remaining there for as long as desired. The speed with which the U.S. defeated Iraq in the Gulf War only affirmed the success and immutability of a strategy dependent on massed brute force and an inferior enemy whose territory could be occupied without repercussions to the homeland. 

Such an approach is infeasible with the information revolution and emerging technologies that will favor defense over offense, including sensors, networked systems, machine learning, hypersonic weapons and additive manufacturing. Unfortunately, some of this technology is only “emerging” for the U.S. defense community, as it exists commercially in many of our quotidian apps. Tanks and battleships will become targets that precision strike weapons can easily identify and severely damage, if not destroy. Brose writes, “Rather than large numbers of people operating small numbers of heavily manned machines, the future force should consist of smaller numbers of people operating much larger numbers of highly intelligent unmanned machines.” The U.S. also requires a serious shift in favor of software over hardware and a focus on moving limited amounts of data through highly decentralized networks. 

Brose addresses the most common counter argument: The U.S. leads the world in military spend by a significant amount - why can’t a percentage of the nearly $700bn+ annual budget go towards investing in this force of the future? Ah, if only it were so simple. Much of this budget is already reserved for programs of record, like expensive legacy platforms. Of the budget that is not reserved, Pentagon planners must determine how to spend it nearly two years in advance. (Note the absurdist element in asking budgeters to purchase their innovative, future capabilities based on what exists in the present). But fear not, if the Pentagon wants to change where some of its spend is allocated in a given year, towards say, emerging technologies, a generous 0.009% of the budget is available. Add to this a system that favors the few incumbent defense contractors, a Congress that tends to prioritize the interests of its constituents over the national interest, and career bureaucrats who get promoted for not opposing the status quo, and what remains is an environment that is de facto hostile to emerging technology. 

Brose goes to pains to illustrate that China is all the motivation Americans should need to recognize the necessity of change. China is not just an adversary or even another great power; on its current trajectory, it will be a peer to the U.S., a concept more foreign to most Americans than China itself. China’s military budget increased by 900% since observing the U.S. swiftly defeat Iraq in the Gulf War. China has specifically invested in undermining the U.S.’s offensive strategy by increasing its missile arsenal, building out small but significant outposts in the South China Sea, and more generally tracking to become the global leader in AI. Should the U.S. face China in a more direct conflict, it will not have the luxury of moving the required ships, carriers, weapons and supplies from U.S. bases to forward positions over the weeks and months before it is ready to fight, as these will quite literally become target practice for the enemy. 

The cynical will note Brose works for Anduril, a defense technology startup developing autonomous machines, and a company with a specific interest in competing against the defense primes so entrenched in Washington. But Brose is hardly the first person to sound the alarm for change. Chuck Hagel and Ash Carter were the first secretaries of defense to take the controversial stand that America’s advantage was eroding. James Mattis kept this argument alive with the influential 2018 National Defense Strategy. Most convincingly that Brose’s thesis transcends any existing corporate interests is his decades long career as a public servant, where he held positions as staff director of the senate armed services committee and policy advisor to John McCain. _The Kill Chain_’s motivation is pragmatic, not ideological.
